# Lecture 2 (Thu 10/05/2023)

Owner: Philip Manfred Pincencia

For equiprobable sample space, if $u\in S$, then $P(\{u\})=\frac{1}{|S|}$

Example: 

Given a box with 6 pennies and 8 quarters. Pick 5 of the coins at random (without replacement). What is the probability that we choose 2 pennies and 3 quarters? 

Think the coins are numbered. If the coins are picked without replacement, it’s the same as choosing 5 coins at the same time. 

Total of 5-tuples of coins is $\binom{14}{5}$. There are $\binom{6}{2}$ ways of 2 pennies and $\binom{8}{3}$ of picking 3 quarters. So, the number of desired 5 tuples is their product, $\binom{6}{2}\binom{8}{3}$. Therefore, the probability is $\frac{\binom{6}{2}\binom{8}{3}}{\binom{14}{5}}$. 

Note: We take the product because for one tuple of pennies there are multiple ways of picking triples of quarters. 

## Conditional Probability

Intuition: 

Toss a coin 3 times. What is the probability you get exactly 2 heads? 

Sample space: 

$S=\{(HHH), (HHT), (HTH), (HTT), (THH), (THT), (TTH), (TTT)\}$

For each triple, its probability is $P(\{u\})=\frac{1}{|S|}=\frac{1}{8}$. 

Now pick the triples that have exactly two heads: $E=\{(HHT), (HTH), (THH)\}$. 

So, the probability is $P(E)=\frac{3}{8}$.

Now, new variation of the question: What is the probability we get exactly 2 heads, given that the first two flips are not both heads?

Note: $E=$“Get exactly 2 heads” and $F=$“First two flips are not both heads” are events.

 So, from $F=\{(HHT), (HTH), (THH)\}$ 

and $E=\{(HTH), (THH), (HTT),(THT),(TTH),(TTT)\}$, $EF=\{(HTH),(THH)\}$

Therefore, the probability is 

$$
P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}=\frac{\frac{|EF|}{|S|}}{\frac{|F|}{|S|}}=\frac{|EF|}{|F|}=\frac{2}{3}
$$

*Note: $P(F)\neq 0$. (Has to in order to make it answerable)*

In general, $P(EF)\neq P(E)$. Thus, $P(EF)\neq P(E)P(F)$, generally. Only if the

Another example: 

Roll 2 dice. Find the probability that both dice are even, given their sum is $\geq 10$. 

Define two events: 

- $E=$”both dice even”
- $F=$”sum is $\geq 10$” $= \{(4,6),(5,6),(6,6), (6,5), (5,5),(6,4)\}$

 Want $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}$. 

$EF=\{(4,6), (6,6), (6,4)\}$. And because this is equiprobable, $P(EF)=\frac{|EF|}{|S|}=\frac{3}{6^2}$

$P(F)=\frac{|F|}{|S|}=\frac{6}{6^2}$. 

So, $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}=\frac{3}{6}=0.5$. 

Now, let’s find the probability the sum is 7, given the sum is not equal to 6. 

Define events:

- $E=$”sum $=7$” $= \{(1,6), (2,5), (3,4), (4,3), (5,2), (6,1)\}$
- $F=$”sum $\neq 6$” $=\{(1,5), (2,4), (3,3), (4,2), (5,1)\}^c$

Want $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}$. 

- $P(F^c)=\frac{5}{6^2}$. Hence, $P(F)=1-P(F^c)=\frac{31}{36}$
- Note $E\subseteq F$ (because if the sum is 7, it immediately is not equal to 6, but not vice versa). Hence, $P(EF)=P(E)=\frac{6}{36}$

So, $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}=\frac{\frac{5}{36}}{\frac{31}{36}}=\frac{5}{31}$

## Bayes Theorem

Note: generally, $P(E|F)\neq P(F|E)$

But, $P(EF)=P(E|F)P(F)=P(F|E)P(E)$

$$
P(F|E)=\frac{P(E|F)P(F)}{P(E)}=\frac{P(E|F)\cdot P(F)}{P(E|F)\cdot P(F)+P(E|\bar F)\cdot P(\bar F)}
$$

Special cases: 

1. If $E, F$ are disjoint, then $EF=\emptyset$. So, $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}=\frac{P(\emptyset)}{P(F)}=0$. 
2. If $E\subseteq F$, then $EF=E$. So, $P(F|E)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(E)}=\frac{P(E)}{P(E)}=1$. (If the smaller occurred, the bigger one must also occur, not vice versa)

Example: 

A box contains 3 blue, 4 red, 7 green marbles. One marble is chosen at random, and it is not red. What the probability that it is not blue?

Define events:

- $E=$”marble is blue”
- $F=$”marble is not red”

Want $P(E|F)$

Know $P(F^c)=\frac{4}{3+4+7}=\frac{4}{14}$. So, $P(F)=1-P(F^c)=\frac{10}{14}$. 

Claim: $E\subseteq F$. Why? Because if the marble is blue, then for sure it is not red. So, $P(EF)=P(E)=\frac{3}{14}$. 

Hence, $P(E|F)=\frac{P(EF)}{P(F)}=\frac{P(E)}{P(F)}=\frac{3}{10}$.