# Lecture 14 (Thu 11/16/2023)

Owner: Philip Manfred Pincencia

### More example problems

Let $X,Y$ have joint pdf which is uniform on unit square. Let $Z=X+Y$. Find pdf of $Z$. 

Find CDF of $Z$, then differentiate

1. $F_Z(u)=P(Z\leq u)=P(X+Y\leq u)=P((X,Y)\in T)$, 
    
    where $T=\{(s,t):s+t\leq u\}$.
    
    The line is $t\leq -s + u$. Depending on the value of $u$, we have 4 cases:
    
    - Case 1: $u\in [0,1]$
    $F_Z(u)=\iint f_{X,Y}(s,t)~dsdt=\iint_T dsdt=$ Area of triangle $=\frac{1}{2}u^2$
    - Case 2: $u\in[1,2]$
    $F_Z(u)=$Area of square - Area of triangle above the line = $1-\frac{1}{2}(2-u)^2=-\frac{u^2}{2}+2u-1$
    - Case 3: $u>2$ → $F_Z(u)=1$ (the whole square)
    - Case 4: $u<0$ → $F_Z(u)=\emptyset$ (line below the square)

Summarize, 

$$
F_Z=\begin{cases} 0&u<0\\      
\frac{1}{2}u^2 & u\in[0,1] \\
      -\frac{u^2}{2}+2u-1 & u\in[1,2] \\
      1&u>2
   \end{cases}
$$

So, the pdf is just

$$
f_Z=\begin{cases} 0&u<0~\cup u>2\\      
u & u\in[0,1] \\
      -u+2 & u\in[1,2]
      
   \end{cases}
$$

## Independence of Random Variables

**Def:** Random Variables $X,Y$ are independent if **for every** pair of set of real numbers $A,B\subseteq\mathbb{R}$, the events $\{X\in A\}$ and $\{Y\in B\}$ are independent. 

In other words, $P(X\in A, Y\in B)=P(X\in A)\cdot P(Y\in B)$

Equivalents: 

- Joint CDF factors: $F_{X,Y}(u,v)=F_X(u)F_Y(v)~~\forall u,v$
- Joint pdf factors (continuous): $f_{X,Y}(u,v)=f_X(u)f_Y(v)~~\forall u,v$
- Joint pmf factors (discrete): $p_{X,Y}(u,v)=p_X(u)p_Y(v)~~\forall u,v$

*Have to be true for all $u,v$.* 

Terminology: If $X,Y$ are independent and identically distributed (same pdf or pmf). Then we say, **$X,Y$ are i.i.d (so, independent & same pdf/pmf)**

### Example 1:

Toss 2 fair coins. Let $X=$#Heads, $Y=$1 if same, 0 else. Are $X,Y$ independent?

*Observation:* $P(X=1)=P(HT,TH)=\frac{1}{2}$. Suppose you learn $Y=0$, then we are to have a different. So, $P(X=1|Y=0)=1\neq \frac{1}{2}$. So they are not independent. 

Calculation: 

$p_{X,Y}(1,0)=P(X=1, Y=0)=P(HT,TH)=\frac{1}{2}$

Marginal pmfs are: 

$p_X(1)=P(X=1)=\frac{1}{2}$   and    $p_Y(0)=P(Y=0)=P(HT,TH)=\frac{1}{2}$. 

And so, $p_X(1)\cdot p_Y(0)=\frac{1}{4}\neq \frac{1}{2}$. 

Example 2: 

Suppose $X,Y$ have joint pdf: 

$$
f_{X,Y}(u,v)=\frac{1}{2\pi}e^{-\frac{u^2+v^2}{2}}
$$

Are $X,Y$ independent random variables?

*Note:* 

$f_{X,Y}(u,v)=\left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-\frac{u^2}{2}}\right)\cdot \left(\frac{1}{\sqrt{2\pi}}e^{-\frac{v^2}{2}}\right)$

Actually checking, the marginal pdf of $X$ is: 

$$
f_X(u)=\int_{-\infty}^\infty f_{X,Y}(u,v)~dv=
$$