# Lecture 6 (Thu 10/19/2023)

Owner: Philip Manfred Pincencia

## Random Variables

Example: 

Sample space: “flip coins until 1st head”

$S=\{H,TH,TTH,...\}$

Define a random variable: 

$X=$ “# of tosses until 1st head (includes the Head)”

$X(H)=1, X(TH)=2, X(TTH)=3,...$

 $P(X=1)=P(H)=\frac{1}{2}$

$P(X=2)=P(TH)=\frac{1}{2^2}$

$\vdots$

$P(X=n)=P(T…TH)=\frac{1}{2^n}$

Define a 2nd random variable $Y$ to indicate oddness.

$Y=1$ if $X$ is odd, $0$ if even.

So, 

$Y(H)=1, Y(TH)=0, Y(TTH)=1,...$

What is $P(Y=0)$? 

$P(Y=0)=P(X=2)+P(X=4)+P(X=6)+… \\
\hspace{1cm} \frac{1}{2^2}+\frac{1}{2^4}+\frac{1}{2^6}+...=\frac{\frac{1}{4}}{1-\frac{1}{4}}=\frac{1}{3}$. 

Since $Y=\{0,1\}$, $P(Y=1)=1-P(Y=0)=\frac{2}{3}$. 

Notation: 

Let $A\subseteq\mathbb{R}$. we will use this notation: 

$\{X\in A\}=\{u\in S: X(u)\in A\}$

Example: 

$\{X\in [4,\infty)\}$ means $\{u\in S: X(u)\geq 4\}=\{X\geq 4\}$

Short-hand is the best way, but it’s more official to know that we take an element from $S$ such that the $X(u)$ satisfies its range. 

Example: 

Flip biased coin 3 times. $p=P(H)$. 

Define random variable $X=$ “# of heads”

What is $P(X\leq 1)$? 

The event is: $\{x\leq 1\}=\{u\in S:X(u)\leq 1\}=\{TTT, HTT, THT, TTH\}$

So, $P(X\leq 1)=P(X=0)+P(X=1)=(1-p)^3+\binom{3}{1}~p(1-p)^2$

### Fundamental Question about a Random Variable $X$ is:

What is $P(X\leq\text{something})$?

> **Def:** The Cumulative Distribution Function (C.D.F.) of a random variable $X$ is the following: 
$F_X(u)=P(X\leq u), ~\forall u\in\mathbb{R}$      *(**always** use uppercase $F$ for C.D.F.)
Try not to use* $”X”$ as the argument! Use $u,v,w,a,b$.
> 

Idea: Cumulate probability from $-\infty$ until a certain point $u$. 

Ex: 

Flip a fair coin 2 times. $S=\{HH,HT,TH,TT\}$

Define Random variable $X=\text{”num of heads”}=\{0,1,2\}$. Find C.D.F. of $X$. 

 $P(X=0)=\frac{1}{4}, ~P(X=1)=\frac{1}{2},~ P(X=2)=\frac{1}{4}$. 

Plot C.D.F.: $F_X(u)=P(X\leq u)$. 

Case 1: $u<0: P(X\leq u)=0$ 

Case 2: $0\leq u<1: P(X\leq u)=P(X=0)=\frac{1}{4}$

Case 3: $1\leq u < 2:$ $P(X\leq u)=P(X=0)+P(X=1)=\frac{1}{4}+\frac{1}{2}=\frac{3}{4}$

Case 4:$u\geq 2$$u\geq 2: P(X\leq u)=P(X<2)+P(X=2)=1$

Another example: 
Suppose an experiment has sample space $S=[0,1]$. Suppose $P([a,b])=b-a$ whenever $0\leq a\leq b\leq 1$. Define a random variable $X$ as in the following diagram: 

From $v=\frac{1}{2}$ to 1, $X(v)=0$ and $X(v)=v^2$ from $0$ to $\frac{1}{2}$. 

What is $F_X(v)$? 

Need to compute $P(X\leq u)$ for all $u$. 

Case 1: $u<0: P(X\leq u)=0$ 

Case 2: $u=0:$ $P(X=0)=P(\{0\}\cup[\frac{1}{2}, 1])=P(\{0,0\})+P(\{[\frac{1}{2},1]\})=0+\frac{1}{2}=\frac{1}{2}$

Case 2: $u\geq\frac{1}{4}:$ $P(X\leq u)=1$ because the maximum value of $X(v)$ is $\frac{1}{4}$. 

Case 3: $0<u<\frac{1}{4}: F_X(u)=P(X\leq u)=P([0, \sqrt{u}]\cup[\frac{1}{2}, 1])=\sqrt{u}+\frac{1}{2}$

Example: Flip a coin 3 times. Define 2 random variables: 

- $X=$ “# of heads”
- $Y=$ 1 if 1st flip is heads, 0 else.

What is $P(X\leq Y)$? 

Solution: 
Figure out the event $\{X\leq Y\}=\{u\in S: X(u)\leq Y(u)\}$

For each $u$, $X(u)\in\{0,1,2,3\}$ and $Y(u)\in\{0,1\}$. 

Observation: If $X(u)\in\{2,3\}$, then we cannot have $X\leq Y$. (rule out immediately)

When is $X=0$? Only when $TTT$ is the outcome. Because $0\leq Y(u)$ always. 

Therefore, $TTT\in \{X\leq Y\}$. 

When is $X=1$? Only when $HTT,THT,TTH$. $Y=1$ only if $HTT$. 

Therefore, $HTT\in \{X\leq Y\}$

Hence, $P(X\leq Y)=P(\{TTT, HTT\})=P(TTT)+P(HTT)=\frac{1}{8}+\frac{1}{8}=\frac{2}{8}$.